From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> It was a chaotic weekend of news out of
Washington.
>> [music]
>> There was a shooting at an event where
President Trump and top cabinet
officials were gathered, [music] which
we're following and will update on later
in the show.
And also, Trump abruptly and
dramatically called off the latest
[music] round of peace talks with Iran
at the very last minute, leaving the
fate of the ceasefire in limbo.
One of the main reasons Trump gave was
that he doesn't think Iran is sending
credible negotiators to the [music]
table and says he has no idea who's
actually in charge of the country.
Today, my colleague Farnaz Fassihi takes
us inside the world of Iran's leaders
and explains what her reporting [music]
reveals about what they really want.
It's Monday, [music] April 27th.
Farnaz, it's wonderful to have you back
on the show. Thank you for having me,
Natalie.
So, what do we know about what just
happened? Where we saw Trump suddenly
back away from face-to-face negotiations
with Iran. It almost seemed like over
the weekend he kind of turned the team
of American negotiators around as they
were basically on their way to the
airport.
We started this weekend thinking that
Iranians and Americans were going to
meet in Islamabad for a second round of
negotiations. Iran's foreign minister
went to Islamabad and the US special
envoy, Steve Whitkoff, and President
Trump's son-in-law, Jared Kushner, were
scheduled to also fly to Pakistan on
Saturday, and everyone anticipated
another round of talks. And then we
started getting mixed messages. The
Iranians said, "Oh, well, we're not
meeting directly with the Americans."
And the foreign minister left Pakistan,
and President Trump abruptly announced
on social media that he was canceling
the talks and not sending his envoys to
meet with the Iranians.
And now we're in a state of limbo.
There's no talks. There's a unilateral
[clears throat]
ceasefire declared by President Trump
without a set deadline. And the Iranians
are under a sea blockade. So, the
situation, I think, is very fragile. And
what about the president's claim, which
he made on social media over the
weekend, and he's made before, that the
Iranian regime is in complete disarray,
and that he doesn't even know who's
making the decisions in the country?
Well, since the start of this war, some
of the big questions have been, "Who's
running Iran? Who's making the
decisions? Where is the new supreme
leader, Mojtaba Khamenei? And are there
divisions at the top?" I spent the past
month reporting these questions, talking
to sources inside Iran. I interviewed 22
people inside Iran. Some of them were
senior officials, some were members of
the Revolutionary Guards, some of them
know Mojtaba Khamenei or his father, and
all of them understand the framework of
how decisions are being made in Iran and
how the country is being run. And that
has helped me answer this puzzle.
Through just extraordinarily deep
reporting. So, what have you learned?
Well, I'll tell you, in my interviews
over the past month, every time I would
ask that question from sources, I would
say, "Who is making the decisions? Who's
running the country?"
And I would hear Sepah.
Sepah. Sepah means the Revolutionary
Guards.
No one said the Ayatollah. No one said
it's the supreme leader, and that was
just such a difference to how things
were done before the war, where the
senior Ayatollah Khamenei, the supreme
leader of Iran for 37 years, always had
the last word on all decisions that were
critical to the state. And, you know,
before the war, whenever I would ask,
"Who's making the decision?" It would
say, "We're waiting for Mr. Khamenei to
decide. We're waiting for him to say yes
or no." And now it's the generals.
Since the war started, a cohort of
senior Revolutionary Guards generals
have sort of taken over running and
managing the war and running the
country.
Okay, you're saying something that's
actually pretty stark, which is worth
just lingering on for a moment, which is
that the supreme leader is not the one
calling the shots here. And so, I have
to ask, when we say the Revolutionary
Guards are, who are they? Who are we
talking about? The Revolutionary Guards
are the most elite military force in
Iran. They were created in the aftermath
of the 1979 Islamic Revolution as sort
of a line of defense for the regime. But
over the past nearly half a century that
the Islamic Republic's been in power,
the Revolutionary Guards have expanded
their reach and expanded their power.
When we hear think about a military
force, we think of people in uniform who
are in military bases and making
military decisions. Right.
>> But the Revolutionary Guards are all
over the place in Iran. They hold key
positions in the government. Many
lawmakers, ministers, presidents have
been former Revolutionary Guards. The
current speaker of parliament, who's
leading the negotiations with the US, is
a commander of the Revolutionary Guards.
The head of the National Security
Council is a Revolutionary Guards
commander. And they also have a big
footprint in Iran's economy. Mhm. Right.
They have a huge conglomerate in every
economic sector from energy to
transportation to even tourism that you
can think of. So, they really are the
parallel power in Iran. And now, as a
result of war, they've become the
dominant power. That's fascinating. You
know, it's part of a pattern of the
country becoming more and more
militarized and the influence of the
clerics fading. So, this ubiquity of the
guards, that's something that's been
developing over time. Their presence
everywhere. This isn't new, per se.
Right, it's not new, but it's never been
this dominant. The Revolutionary Guards
have been rising for years.
The former supreme leader really relied
on them for securing Iran's borders, for
navigating and cultivating relationships
with proxy militant groups in the region
that were aligned with Iran
ideologically,
such as Hezbollah in Lebanon or Hamas in
Gaza, and the Shia militia in Iraq.
And also, whenever there was an uprising
inside the country and protest against
the government, it was the guards that
took over security and crushed those
protests. And in exchange, the guards
were sort of given more of a free hand
to enter politics and to enter the
economy, and that empowered them in ways
that was far beyond their military role
in Iran.
But they could only rise so far under
the leadership of Ayatollah Khamenei,
the father, because he was the person
with the final authority over
everything. But this war
created an opening for them.
And the guards saw the killing of
Ayatollah Khamenei by the United States
and Israel on the first day of the war
as an opportunity, as an opportunity to
put in place a new supreme leader who
had close ties to them and through whom
they could rule Iran.
Right. You told us last time on the show
that the guards were absolutely critical
in putting the younger Khamenei in place
as supreme leader. They basically got
him there. Exactly. They totally got him
there. I mean, I think the last time we
spoke, we talked about the succession
war and Game of Thrones that was going
on to replace the senior Ayatollah, and
that the Revolutionary Guards really
pushed to have the son succeed him. And
so, the reason you're saying that the
new supreme leader has less sway over
the guards is in part because he's
indebted to them. Is that right? I think
there are a number of factors, Natalie.
One is that he's indebted to them for
his position as the new supreme leader.
He's also indebted to them for the
survival of the regime, right? I mean,
if the Revolutionary Guards basically
managed to contain the threat that this
war brought to the regime when the
Israeli and American air strikes
happened, two military superpowers
attacking Iran, the regime thought that
this was an existential threat, right?
But now they seem confident that they've
contained the threat and there's no
signs of them cracking or defecting or
the Islamic Republic toppling. There are
other reasons for why he's deferring to
the guards as well.
Part of it is his injuries. Mojtaba
Khamenei was gravely injured in the air
strikes that targeted his father's
compound. Right. That's been a big
question mark is exactly how injured.
Very injured. I've heard that one of his
legs may be amputated. He's had three
operations and is waiting for a
prosthetic leg.
He's had operations on one of his arms
and hands, and his face and lips have
been burned severely. And the burns are
so extensive that he can't even speak
properly, which is one of the reasons
why we haven't heard his voice or seen
his face. Yeah, I was going to ask if
that's one of the reasons why he hasn't
made a public appearance. I mean, I'd
imagine that also limits his clout, but
it sounds like he just can't right now.
No, he can't right now. Sources that I
talked to who know him said that he
doesn't want to appear weak and
vulnerable in the first public address
that he gives to the people, whether
it's audio or visual. The extent that
the public has heard from him has been
several written statements that the
state media has read or it's been
published on social media. And another
reason is also the logistics of his
security situation. Hmm. Talk to me
about that. Well, from the first day of
the war, Israel he said that whoever
succeeds Mr. Khamenei will be a target.
And specifically said that Moqtada is on
their assassination target list. So,
he's been moved to a very high-secure
secret place. Access to him is almost
impossible for government officials or
military commanders. There's no
electronics around him. He can't speak
on the phone or engage electronically in
any way. And communicating with him is
sort of, you know, the old ways of
writing longhand letters, sealing it in
an envelope, and having a human chain of
couriers carry the letters to his secure
place and then back. And logistically,
that takes time. So, you can't imagine
that
it's hard for him to be making decisions
in real time, and he would have to
delegate some authority to the generals
that he trusts.
Okay. So, you've described a situation
in which there's this empowered group of
generals within the Revolutionary Guards
who technically answer to the supreme
leader, but that supreme leader is in
hiding, he's badly injured, he's really
hard to get to. So, how do they actually
make decisions in that scenario? Like,
how does that work?
Well, you know, in Iran, particularly in
this new era, decisions are being made
more collectively and collaboratively.
The generals definitely are leading the
charge on calling the shots, but there's
a debate going on. In fact, people who I
spoke to in Iran were telling me that
the decision-making is now kind of like
a board of directors that the Ayatollah
is sort of the director of the board,
and the generals are the members of the
board, and that yeah, it's not a one-man
show anymore. And when those decisions
are eventually brought to the supreme
leader through couriers to his hideout,
is he essentially being asked to
rubber-stamp them? What's his role in
this?
His role is to give them feedback and to
approve them. Because one way that the
generals can tell the public that the
decisions that they're making is
legitimate, particularly when it comes
to giving any concessions to the United
States, is to say, "Look, what we're
deciding is endorsed by the supreme
leader, so everyone should go along."
As to whether it's a rubber-stamp, well,
to the best of our knowledge, he hasn't
objected to any of their decisions yet,
and he's gone along. Part of that reason
is because of the relationship that he
has with the generals and the trust that
he has. Okay. Talk to me about that.
That relationship and that trust. How
should we understand it? So, we always
knew that he had close ties to the
guards, but my reporting shows that
these ties go much deeper, and they go
back decades. One way to understand it
is that the supreme leader now has some
of his best friends, people he has known
since he was a teenager and grew up with
in charge.
>> Huh. And that story goes back to when he
was 17 years old in the 1980s, he
volunteered to go fight in the Iran-Iraq
War, and he was placed in a
Revolutionary Guards battalion called
the Happy Brigade.
And in the Happy Brigade, there were
other young soldiers who had
volunteered. And I interviewed one of
his close friends who was deployed with
him to that brigade, and he told me
that, "Look, this experience really
shaped us, and those bonds we made with
the battle buddies
really like carried us and became
lifelong."
As this group aged, they climbed the
ranks of power. Some of his friends from
this particular brigade became key
influential politicians and military
commanders and intelligence officials.
And we're kind of seeing that play out
right now. It's a relationship of
friends who are on first-name basis and
of peers. So, you're saying part of this
trust is really that
Khamenei has deep ties with these people
that go back years. I mean, he trusts
them because he's known them for a very
long time and has worked directly with
him. Exactly. And that's become a
central dynamic of this relationship
right now between the supreme leader and
the guards.
So, when you add this whole picture
together, what you're describing is a
pretty fundamental shift in the way that
the entire country and its government
works. Before, the supreme leader
empowered the guards, yes, but also
directed them. And now, it kind of seems
like the tail is wagging the dog. Yes.
You know, I think when most people,
Natalie, think of Iran, they think of an
Islamic theocracy run by clerics. We've
always referred to Iran as a clerical
rule, right? And we're seeing that
change in real time
>> [music]
>> now.
It's shifting away and transforming from
a [music] clerical theocracy to a
military dictatorship with a cleric as
its leader.
So, I think this change could have
surprising implications for Iran and
also for negotiations with the United
States.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Farnaz, just explain why it matters that
the power structure in Iran, as you just
told us, is shifting to one where the
military, the guards, really hold all
the cards and the clerics are secondary.
Well, for Iranians, it could be worse
politically. It could be
more repression if that's at all
possible.
>> Hmm. Because we've seen the guards over
the years, whenever there's a protest or
uprising, take control of crackdowns and
killings and crushing the protests. So,
it's very likely that dissent will be
less tolerated, that there'll even be
more crackdowns.
But, in terms of negotiations with the
United States or the way that Iran might
deal with the West,
the guards could be more pragmatic than
the clerics and their religious
ideology.
Hold on. What? The military hardliners
could be more pragmatic? How? Well,
because these generals are not as
motivated and driven by the cleric
ideology that defined Iran in the past
47 years, sort of the death to America,
the religious theocracy. What motivates
these generals is power and money. Hmm.
And for both of those things to happen,
the regime needs to survive and it needs
to thrive economically.
So, when you say these generals are not
ideological, it sounds like what you're
saying is they're not really driven as
much by a cause. They're driven
essentially by self-preservation.
It is worth noting that this is
definitely not how we've been talking
about them up until this point. We've
been talking about them as hardliners.
Right. The view of the Islamic Republic
from the outside is an ideological
theocracy driven by anti-American and
anti-Israeli and religious Islamic
ideology. And that's sort of how they've
organized themselves for much of the
time that they've ruled. There's
definitely a faction still within the
system that is very hardline, that is
driven exactly by those ideologies, but
they've been kind of sidelined from
decision-making. And the generals who
are now in charge have a real interest
in making a deal with the United States
because they view this as survival.
And that's a real shift because,
remember, just up until a few months
ago, the former Ayatollah Khamenei, the
supreme leader, had banned Iranians from
directly engaging with Americans. But, 5
weeks after the US killed their supreme
leader and waging a vicious war against
Iran, suddenly, the commanders of the
Revolutionary Guards are sitting across
the table from Vice President J.D.
Vance. I mean, I would not believe it if
someone had told me that 5 weeks ago.
But, can I just raise a question about
this on their pragmatism? We have seen
these generals in charge really willing
to use hardline tactics. Like, they've
been willing to hold up the strait.
They've been willing to bomb their
neighbors to sow chaos in the region.
Does that bear on their pragmatism?
Like, how do you make sense of that?
We've seen the generals deploy tactics
that they thought would preserve the
Islamic Republic system and regime by
escalating the war and making it very
costly for not just US and Israel, but
also for the all the Arab countries by
blowing up the region, thinking that
this would create deterrence, right?
But, we've also seen that they've
discovered the Strait of Hormuz as a new
card, as something that they could upend
the global economy with and have impact
on the energy supplies of the world at
fertilizer supplies and all commercial
ships, oil tankers.
They're using these tactics because they
want to gain leverage at the negotiating
table. Leverage that they can come sit
across this table from the United States
and say in exchange for opening the
Strait, we want you to lift the
sanctions against us or we want you to
unfreeze billions of dollars of our
assets that are frozen. So, that's the
key thing to remember is that there's a
strategy behind the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard's moves. Okay,
you're starting to get into this, but
let's talk about the actual terms of any
deal. You said these generals are open
to a real give-and-take with the
American side. So, what are they willing
to offer and what do they want?
The most important incentive for Iran,
for its leaders and the Revolutionary
Guard is to reach some sort of an end to
hostilities and to get sanctions relief.
Iran's economy was in shambles even
before the war, its currency was
plunging and inflation was skyrocketing
and the war has just made everything
worse and there's also on top of that an
estimate of from 300 billion to 1
trillion dollars of economic losses as a
result of the war.
>> [snorts]
>> In order for Iran to rebuild and
reconstruct, it needs to lift sanctions
and it needs to get access to its funds
and sort of the global financial
markets. From Iran's perspective,
basically, the idea is, look, the United
States and Israel have really destroyed
a lot of our country. We need money to
rebuild it. Exactly, we need money to
rebuild it, we need money to improve the
economy because one of the big sources
of dissent and protest has been
economically driven. And you know, one
of the things that they've done is
they've proposed a very detailed list of
ways in which American companies can
come to Iran and invest in Iran. For the
first time in 47 years, the generals
have gone to the Americans and said, "If
there's a deal, your oil and shipping
companies can come and invest in Iran.
You can help us reconstruct and
rebuild." And that's something that's
never been done before. The senior
Ayatollah Khamenei had specifically
banned all American companies from
coming to Iran after the 2015 nuclear
deal and now the generals are doing away
with that order. They're actually,
you're saying, talking about inviting
the Americans in as investors, as
collaborators. You're saying working
with them to rebuild the country,
really. Yes, exactly. These generals are
basically appealing to President Trump's
business side and deal-making side.
They're trying to create financial
incentives for the Trump administration
to engage with Iran, similar to what a
lot of other countries have done.
Just fascinating.
What about the other sticking points of
any deal? For example, the big one,
restricting the enrichment of uranium
that the Iranians could use to build a
bomb. Where do they stand on that?
These are sticking points, Natalie. To
what level Iran is willing to stop
enriching uranium, whether it's going to
be a suspension or shutting down its
nuclear programs and what it's going to
do with the stockpile of highly enriched
uranium that it has. These are issues
that have not been resolved. But I think
the most important thing for Iran is to
save face. Mhm. They don't want to look
as if they've surrendered. President
Trump really likes to keep saying that I
have achieved something that no American
president has achieved. I've destroyed
Iran's military and nuclear capabilities
and he wants to say that the war forced
Iran to capitulate. And Iran is
absolutely adamant, whatever deal it
reaches, it's also able to save face.
And a lot of I think the tension is now
around this idea that how do we reach a
deal where we don't look like we gave
something that we weren't willing to
give before the war as a result of the
war. Right, and part of the tension
there is that President Trump also needs
to be able to save face and message to
the American public that he actually got
something out of this war and that what
he got was better than the deal that had
already been achieved under Obama to
restrict and cap uranium enrichment in
Iran. So, both sides are dealing with
that face-saving impulse. Exactly, both
sides are dealing with that. President
Trump also needs to be able to say that
I achieved something from this very
unpopular war as well. Okay, let's talk
about the Strait of Hormuz, the
million-dollar question on everybody's
mind. Will things go back to normal in
the Strait or does Iran and its leaders
now see this as theirs to control as
they see fit?
Iran and its leaders view the Strait of
Hormuz as their territory. They've now
discovered that they can control it,
that they can even threaten ships by
suggesting there are mines at the bottom
of the seas and of course insurance
companies are not going to risk it and
that alone will upend the global
shipping and energy and economy. So,
they now have a tool in their disposal
and they're trying to figure out how to
monetize it because they've calculated
that if they toll the ships that are
passing through the Strait of Hormuz,
they can make a lot more money than they
do from their oil revenues. Oh, wow. So,
even here you see their pragmatism at
work, looking for money-making
opportunities, calculating the best way
to do that. Farnaz, what about Israel?
Because Israel's been this other major
factor that's been affecting the
negotiations. A potential Israeli attack
is part of what's keeping the Ayatollah
in hiding and really affecting the way
the leadership works. Are the guards
assuming that Trump can keep Israel from
waging the kinds of attacks that we've
seen destabilize these negotiations?
How do they view Israel in this?
They view Israel as a major threat
that could still be a threat even after
conventional war is over. Iran and
Israel were engaged in a shadow war for
many, many years that I've written about
with my colleague in Israel, Ronen
Bergman. Israel had assassinated
multiple Iranian nuclear scientists and
military commanders and done covert
operations and attacks on military sites
and nuclear sites. The threat of Israel
will be there and also the threat that
they might covertly try to assassinate
the supreme leader or any other
official. So, I think that they believe
that the United States has a lot of
influence and power over Israel and that
once there's a ceasefire, it also
extends to Israel, but I don't think
there's a guarantee that Israel's going
to not continue the covert operations.
Got it. So, essentially, Israel remains
this big wild card and the negotiations
are now stalled on the other sticking
points. But can I ask what is the ideal
realistic outcome of these negotiations
for the people leading Iran right now?
That's a really good question and the
answer might surprise you.
I think the generals leading the
negotiations
are looking at a kind of a deal that
ends this limbo status they've been in
with the United States for 47 years
where Iran is not really at war with the
US, but there's this threat hanging over
it. They keep saying we want a grand
deal. We want to reach a big deal that
will be the end of hostilities and it
could sort of stabilize Iran if that
happens. Now, it's not clear whether
that's going to happen or not. This is
sort of the ideal situation for them,
that they have lasting peace, sanctions
are removed, American companies come in,
investments come in and Iran can
stabilize economically as well as
politically.
It's interesting, we did not get in Iran
the kind of regime change that President
Trump and his allies forecast and maybe
imagined would come of this war.
But just in terms of these negotiations,
these peace talks,
is the president right in some sense
when he says that there are now more
reasonable people in charge in Iran?
Just in terms of reaching a deal?
I think in some ways, yes.
The president has said the war brought
regime change in Iran. There's clearly
not been a regime change.
The Islamic Republic is still very
[music] entrenched and we still don't
know how this new era of leadership is
going to evolve when things stabilize,
when Mojtaba Khamenei comes out of
hiding, is he going to retain power,
what that dynamic will be, if the
Revolutionary Guard get the money, how
they're going [music] to spend it, are
they going to rearm their proxies and
what the political repression in Iran is
going to look like. The situation is
very fluid, right? [music] And of
course, there's a risk that they're
going to overplay their hands using all
the levers that they think they have in
negotiations. [music]
But on this very narrow question of
whether the people sitting across
[music] the table from the American
negotiating team are more motivated to
reach a deal,
I think yes, [music] they are.
>> [music]
>> Well, Farnaz,
thank you so much. We really appreciate
it. Thank you so much for having me,
Natalie.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
New information continued to emerge
about Saturday's shooting at the White
House Correspondents Dinner in D.C.
The incident started when a gunman
attempted to storm the annual event,
where President Trump and senior cabinet
officials were in attendance.
The attacker ran through a security
checkpoint and exchanged fire with the
authorities before being subdued and
taken [music] into custody.
He was armed with knives, a shotgun, and
a handgun. [music]
Our colleague Shawn McCreesh was there
as part of a pool of reporters covering
the president, and he witnessed [music]
the chaotic scene as it unfolded. We
were sort of milling about,
looking for seats, trying to connect to
the Wi-Fi. I asked a young Secret
Service agent to take me to the
bathroom.
A moment later, we were both in there
washing our hands, making chitchat, and
suddenly we heard all this yelling, all
this commotion, and he looked at me, his
eyes grew wide, and we both darted out
of the bathroom, turned the corner, and
there were probably five or six agents
with guns drawn pointed right at our
chests like this. And in about 2
seconds, they sort of assessed that we
weren't a threat and then began yelling
at us to get down and to cross the hall,
and we had no idea what we were walking
into.
Inside the main ballroom, journalists
and other attendees hit the floor to
take cover, [music]
while Secret Service officers whisked
away top Trump officials and their
spouses. [music]
One of the things that made it such a
crazy scene was that the people who were
running around the hallways with
basically machine guns were also wearing
tuxedos and suits because so many of the
agents were dressed up like party
guests. And so you really had no idea
what was going on because every which
way you looked, you didn't know, you
know, who had a gun, what was going on.
Cabinet members were running across the
hall. It just felt like
total chaos.
>> [music]
>> About an hour later, back at the White
House, Trump addressed reporters, many
of whom were attendees at the gala.
Nobody told me this was such a dangerous
business
profession. If Marco would have told me,
maybe I wouldn't have run. Maybe I would
have said, "I'll take a pass." No, it's
a dangerous profession,
but I don't view it that way. He said
he'd planned to deliver a scathing
speech at the event, but now he wanted
to emphasize the need for national unity
and bipartisan healing. I was all set to
really rip it,
and I said to my people, "This would be
the most inappropriate speech ever made
if I said what
So I have to save it. I don't know if I
could ever be as rough as I was going to
be tonight. I think I'm going to be
probably very nice. I'll be very boring
the next time, but He also said that the
shooting was another reason to build out
a larger ballroom in the East Wing of
the White House, which would have
stronger security measures built in. I
didn't want to say this, but this is why
we have to have
all of the
attributes of what we're planning at the
White House. It's actually a larger
room, and it's a much more secure. It's
got
It's dome proof, it's bulletproof glass.
We need the ballroom. That's why Secret
Service, that's why the military are
demanding it.
>> [music]
>> The authorities have identified the
suspect in the attack as Cole Thomas
Allen, a 31-year-old from California.
In a note that law enforcement
attributed to the suspect,
>> [music]
>> he said he was targeting administration
officials, and he conveyed deep anger at
the president without [music] mentioning
him by name.
He's set to be arraigned in federal
court on Monday.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson, Nina Feldman, Stella Tan, and
Michael Simon Johnson. It was edited by
Michael Benoist and Patricia Willens,
and contains music by Marion Lozano, Pat
McCusker, and Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood. [music]
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.